---
layout: post
tags: linux osx tmux screen
date: 2015-05-21 09:26:31
title: Playing with Tmux
published: true
---

`tmux` can be a very powerful substitution for `gnu screen`. It adds some very
neat features like splitting windows into panes, and using socket for several
developers to pair from their own accounts.

[Cheatsheet][cheat]

Install
-------

OSX: `bundle install tmux`

Debian/Ubuntu: `apt-get install tmux`

type `tmux` to start a session, `exit` to get out

Prefix
------

Prefix is required same as in `screen` to distinquish `tmux` command from shell
and applications commands. Default prefix is `Ctrl-b` but it can be changed to
whatever you want.

Sessions
--------

`tmux` to start session with default name like 1, 2 etc.

`tmux new -s mysession` to start a named session

`Ctrl-b d` to detach session

`tmux ls` to list existing sessions

`tmux a` to attach to the only running session

`tmux a -t 1` to attach session 1

`tmux a -t mysession` to attach named session

`tmux ls` to see which sessions exist

to kill session:

`exit` from within session
`timux kill-session -t mysession` -- boy thats cumbersome

Windows
-------

As in screen tmux can run many windows (tabs)

`Ctrl-b c` create new window

`Ctrl-b ,` raname current window

`Ctrl-b n` move to next window

`Ctrl-b p` move to prev window

`Ctrl-b 0` move to the window 0 (first one), same for all other numbers

`Ctrl-b w` interactive window menu

`Ctrl-b &` kill window

[cheat]: https://gist.github.com/henrik/1967800


Panes
-----

Tmux has a nice ability to split wineows vertically or horisontally. Something
like this I use in VIM a lot

`Ctrl-b %` split vertically

`Ctrl-b "` split horisontally

`Ctrl-b o` move to other panel

`Ctrl-b Up|Down|Left|Right` moving with arrow keys between panels

`Ctrl-b Space` circle through predefined Pane layouts

`Ctrl-b x` or `exit` kills pane


Command mode
------------

There is a command mode to execute tmux commands (keyboard shortcuts are
attached to predefined commands)

`Ctrl-b :` open command line allowing to enter commands

`new-window -n proc "top"` opens new window, names it proc, starts top

`source-file ~/.tmux.conf` reads configuration file

Pair programming
----------------

It is possible to use tmux the same way as screen for pair programming if two
people attach to the same session. One difference is that by default it is in
sync for both users, so if one users switches to a new window -- another one
follows. One annoying thing though that you have to have both users in the same
account. With tmux it is possible to use socket instead and it allows people
from different accoutns to connect to the same tmux session. Here is how to set
it up...

Assume that we have users jane and john

* create tmux group

`$ sudo add grup tmux`

* create /var/tmux

`sudo mkdir /var/tmux && chgrp tmux /var/tmux && chmod g+ws /var/tmux`

* add jane and john to tmux group either by editing /etc/group file or as below

`sudo usermod -aG tmux jane`

* create a session via socket

`tmux -S /var/tmux/pairing`

* then attach to it from say john's account:

`tmux -S /var/tmux/pairing a`


Configuration
-------------

Here is my [configuration file][config] which I am sure will evolve with time

[config]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dimus/dotfiles/master/.tmux.conf
