---
layout: post
tags: linux osx tmux screen
date: 2015-05-23 06:47:57
title: Dell 13" XPS 9343 development edition
published: true
---

In the past I wanted to have the most powerful laptop I could get as my
development environment. Also I had been using MacBook Pro machines for about
15 years. With advances of Docker I wanted my next development machine to run
Linux, so I can use Docker development environment natively. I had a MacBook
Air lying around which I converted into Ubuntu 15.04 box and had been
reasonably happy with its performance. And then I read about Dell XPS 13"
developer edition (running Ubuntu 14.04) -- and decided to give it a try.

I ordered the laptop, and a dock station and yesterday was the day when the
lapop arrived. The form factor of it is just magnificent. The screen is as wide
as the screen of 13" macbook air, but the size of the computer is much smaller.
The screen is great and keyboard looks very nice too. It still has a windows
key instead of Ubuntu key, but that is a very minor issue. So how did it fire
as a ubuntu machine?

When I opened laptop first time -- it showed a flashy Ubuntu intro video and
then opened a microscopic Ubuntu install (using max 3200x1800 pixel screen
resolution) window where it asked to enter my name, password, timezone and
other usual things. Then it continued with installation and crashed...

Ok not very good start. I restarted machine and found out that before it did
crash it actually added me to users. Now I could see a microscopic login
prompt.Logging in, all going to System Settings -> Displays and scale UI 2.5x
-- now everyting becomes readable. Computer is sluggish, windows take a lot of
time to open, even terminal is kind of sluggish. Trackpad works every other
time, sometimes it does not response on touches at all, sometimes it works ok.
Keyboard has troubles with starting to insert many characters for no good
reason. When I apt-get update -- I get some errors. When I look -- I see that
there is a 'cdrom' package source from Dell that I need to delete. Also there
are a bunch of Dell sourses in /etc/apt/sources.list.d. Anyway time to upgrade
the system!

I am upgrading it to Ubuntu 15.04 and computer dies. I cannot even get to the
login promt. I restore Dell's 14.04 and try to upgrade that, to 14.04.2 latest
and it also crashes. I give up, wipe out Dell's install and make a clean
install from a USB stick (I did have to format USB stick as FAT32, or it won't
boot). And it works almost perfectly! I was ready to send the machine back to
Dell, and now I actually have a working and fast Ubuntu on it! Wireless,
trackpad, voice, cam, mic -- all are working out of the box. The system is not
sluggish anymore even with max screen resolution. I do change resolution to
1900x1080 though, as with my eyes I cannot see the difference.

As I found out the Dock station does need drivers to work with the laptop, and
drivers that come with it are for Windows only. Sooo -- why did Dell put Dock
station as available accessory to Ubuntu only machine? Go figure...

I would say the [only thing that still nags me is a keyboard][bug]. From time
to time it starts to type a character indefinitely (sometimes a character I did
not even touch) and often types 2 character when I typed one. I hope I will
find a way to fix that in the future. But it happens rare enough and I can say
I have a nice developing laptop now!

Important shorcut that I learned through the process -- is pressing `F2` button
while Dell logo appears on the screen gets to you UEFI window. Pressing `Fn`
and Power starts self test

One more thing -- it is obviously not a gaming laptop. GPU is not powerful at
all. CPU on the other hand is quite powerful. As a small test -- here is querying 1 million rows on several machines:

Geekbench 3 comparison

| Computer                            | Cores     | Single Core | Multicore |
|-------------------------------------|-----------|-------------|-----------|
| MacBookAir 4,2                      | 4         | 2151        | 3811      |
| **Dell XPS 13 9343**                | **4**     | **2989**    | **6539**  |
| MacBookPro 15" early 2013           | 8         | 3070        | 11762     |
| Desktop 64G Ram, SSD,  i7-4930K CPU | 12        | 3971        | 24314     |

So according to the geekbench it looks like this machine is about as powerful
as the top of the line MacBook Pro 2013  with 2.7 GHz processor (obviously
having less threads makes Multicore benchmark about 2 times less).

My current satisfaction from this laptop is about 3 stars out of 5

It is fast for its size, pretty much everything works out of the box with
Ubuntu 15.04, very nice screen, small body, quite light.

Ubuntu 14.04 that comes preinstalled by Dell had been a huge pain and did cost
me almost whole day, Dock station is almost useless with Linux as it does
require drivers, keyboard bug makes typing a bit of a chore, I do miss magnetic
power connector of Macs :)

[bug]: http://en.community.dell.com/techcenter/os-applications/f/4613/t/19630257
